information received since the federal open market committee met in september indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and growth of economic activity has picked up from the modest pace seen in the first half of this year. although the unemployment rate is little changed in recent months job gains have been solid. household spending has been rising moderately but business fixed investment has remained soft. inflation has increased somewhat since earlier this year but is still below the committee's 2 percent longer run objective partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of non energy imports. market based measures of inflation compensation have moved up but remain low most survey based measures of longer term inflation expectations are little changed on balance in recent months.  consistent with its statutory mandate the committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. the committee expects that with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further. inflation is expected to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of past declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. near term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. the committee continues to closely monitor inflation indicators and global economic and financial developments.  against this backdrop the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1/4 to 1/2 percent. the committee judges that the case for an increase in the federal funds rate has continued to strengthen but decided for the time being to wait for some further evidence of continued progress toward its objectives. the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation.  in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate the committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. this assessment will take into account a wide range of information including measures of labor market conditions indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations and readings on financial and international developments. in light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent the committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. the committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate the federal funds rate is likely to remain for some time below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. however the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.  the committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage backed securities in agency mortgage backed securities and of rolling over maturing treasury securities at auction and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. this policy by keeping the committee's holdings of longer term securities at sizable levels should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.  