Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
 
 Meeting of November 12, 1997 
 
 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, November 12, 1997, at 9:00 a.m. 
 
 
 
 
 

Present: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
	          Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman 
		Mr. Broaddus 
		Mr. Ferguson 
		Mr. Gramlich 
		Mr. Guynn 
		Mr. Kelley 
 
 
		Mr. Moskow 
		Mr. Meyer 
		Mr. Parry 
		Ms. Phillips 
		Ms. Rivlin
	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
		Messrs. Hoenig, Jordan, Melzer, and
		    Ms. Minehan, Alternate Members of
		    the Federal Open Market Committee			
 
		Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
                       the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
                       Dallas, and Minneapolis respectively

 
		Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
		Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
		Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary 
		Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
		Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
		Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
		Mr. Prell, Economist 
		Mr. Truman, Economist 
 
Messrs. Cecchetti, Goodfriend, Eisenbeis, Lindsey,
                       Promisel, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate
                       Economists
 		Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account

 Messrs. Madigan and Simpson, Associate Directors,
                       Divisions of Monetary Affairs and Research and
                       Statistics respectively, Board of Governors
					   
 Messrs. Alexander, Hooper, and Ms. Johnson,
                       Associate Directors, Division of International
                       Finance, Board of Governors					   

	
 		Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
                       Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
                       Governors
					   
 Ms. Pianalto and Mr. Rives, First Vice Presidents,
                       Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and St.
                       Louis respectively
 Messrs. Dewald, Hakkio, Rolnick, and Sniderman,
                       Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
                       of St. Louis, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and
                       Cleveland respectively
 Messrs. Bentley, Meyer, and Rosengren, Vice
                       Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
                       Philadelphia, and Boston respectively

 		
Ms. Gonczy and Mr. Koenig, Assistant Vice
                       Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago
                       and Dallas respectively
 Mr. Trehan, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank
                       of San Francisco
					   
					    
 
 
 
 
 
		By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee held on September 30, 1997, were approved.
 
		The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange and international financial markets
in the period since the previous meeting on September 30, 1997.  There
were no System open market transactions in foreign currencies during
this period, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
 
 	 	The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period September
30, 1997, through November 11, 1997.  By unanimous vote, the Committee
ratified these transactions.
 
		By unanimous vote, paragraph 1.A of the Authorization for
Domestic Open Market Operations was amended to raise from $8 billion
to $12 billion the dollar limit on intermeeting changes in System
Account holdings of U.S. government and federal agency securities for
the intermeeting period through December 16, 1997.  The Manager
advised the Committee that, as was usually the case at this time of
year, the anticipated pattern of reserve needs was such that he might
want to add considerably to the System's outright holdings of U.S.
government securities over the coming intermeeting period.  By
unanimous 