Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
 
 November 6, 2001  
 
 
 
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 6, 2001, at 9:00 a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Present: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
    Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman 
    Mr. Ferguson 
    Mr. Gramlich  
    Mr. Hoenig  
    Mr. Kelley 
    Mr. Meyer 
	Ms. Minehan 
    Mr. Moskow 
    Mr. Poole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Messrs. Jordan, McTeer, Santomero, and Stern, Alternate Members     
    of the Federal Open Market Committee
                                 
                                Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco respectively
 
		        Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist 
		        Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary 
		        Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary 
        Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
		        Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel 
  		        Ms. Johnson, Economist 
        Mr. Reinhart, Economist 
        Mr. Stockton, Economist 
                                 
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Fuhrer, Hakkio, Howard, Hunter, Lindsey,   
Slifman, and Wilcox, Associate Economists   
 	                                                                        		
	                   Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account
 
		       Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
			     Members, Board of Governors
                                	
       Messrs. Ettin and Madigan, Deputy Directors, Divisions of Research 
                 and Statistics and Monetary Affairs respectively, Board of Governors 
                               
 
       Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics,
			     Board of Governors
 
                               Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Associate Directors, Division of
 Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
 
       Messrs. Kamin and Whitesell, Assistant Directors, Divisions of 
                                         International Finance and Monetary Affairs respectively, 
                                         Board of Governors
 
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
         Board of Governors
 
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Office of Board Members,
                                         Board of Governors
 
	Mr. Stewart, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
 
Messrs. Cox and Goodfriend, Mses. Mester and Perelmuter, Messrs. Rolnick and Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of   Dallas, Richmond, Philadelphia, New York, Minneapolis, and Cleveland respectively
 
 	Mr. Thornton, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
 
	Mr. Robertson, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
 
      Mr. Rudebusch, Senior Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of 
                                         San Francisco
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
By unanimous vote, the minutes of the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee held on October 2, 2001, were approved.
 
The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on recent developments in foreign exchange markets.  There were no open market operations in foreign currencies for the System's account in the period since the previous meeting. 
 
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions in government securities and securities issued or fully guaranteed by federal agencies during the period October 2, 2001, through November 5, 2001.  By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
 
By 