Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
 
 January 31, 2006 
 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 31, 2006 at 9:00 a.m.
	   
 
 
 
 Present: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
		Mr. Greenspan, Chairman 
		Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman 
		Ms. Bies 
		Mr. Ferguson 
		Mr. Guynn 
		Mr. Kohn 
		Mr. Lacker 
		Mr. Olson 
		Ms. Pianalto 
		Ms. Yellen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Mses. Cumming and Minehan, Messrs. Moskow, Poole, and Hoenig, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
 Messrs. Fisher, Stern, and Santomero, Presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 
 Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist 
		Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary 
		Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary 
		Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
		Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel 
		Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 
		Ms. Johnson, Economist 
		Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 
 Messrs. Connors, Eisenbeis, Judd, Kamin, Madigan, Sniderman, Struckmeyer,   
and Wilcox, Associate Economists 
 Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account 
 Messrs. Oliner and Slifman, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Whitesell, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors 
 Messrs. English and Sheets, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs and International Finance, respectively, Board of Governors	 
 Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics,
	Board of Governors 
 Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Chaboud and Mses. Kusko and Weinbach, Senior Economists, 
		Divisions of International Finance, Research and Statistics, and Monetary
 		Affairs, respectively, Board of Governors 
 Ms. Roush, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs,
	Board of Governors 
 Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
 Mr. Stone, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
 Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Dallas, respectively 
 Messrs. Evans and Hakkio, Mses. Mester and Perelmuter, and Messrs. Rasche, Rolnick, and Steindel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,  Kansas City, Philadelphia, New York, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and New York, respectively 
 Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
 
 
 
 
 
    
	  In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 31, 2006 had been received and that these individuals had executed their oaths of office.
 
The elected members and alternate members were as follows:
 
Timothy F. Geithner, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with Christine M. Cumming, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York as alternate.
 
Jeffrey M. Lacker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, with Cathy E. Minehan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston as alternate.
 
Sandra Pianalto, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with Michael H. Moskow, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago as alternate.
 
Jack Guynn, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, with William Poole, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis as alternate.
 
Janet L. Yellen, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, with Thomas M. Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City as alternate.
 
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market Committee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2007, with the understanding that in the event of the discontinuance of their official connection with the Board of Governors or with a Federal Reserve Bank, they would cease to have any official connection with the Federal Open Market Committee: 
 
 Alan Greenspan Chairman 1 
 Timothy F. Geithner Vice Chairman 
 Vincent R. Reinhart Secretary and Economist 
 Deborah J. Danker Deputy Secretary 
 David W. Skidmore Assistant Secretary 
 Michelle A. Smith Assistant Secretary 
 Scott G. Alvarez General Counsel 
 Thomas C. Baxter, Jr. Deputy General Counsel 
 Karen H. Johnson Economist 
 David J. Stockton Economist 
 Thomas A. Connors, Robert A. Eisenbeis 
John P. Judd, Steven B. Kamin, Brian F. Madigan, 
Mark S. Sniderman, Charles S. Struckmeyer, 
Joseph S. Tracy, John A. Weinberg, 
and David W. Wilcox Associate Economists 
 
 1. Alan Greenspan was elected to serve for the remainder of the day. 
 In addition, it was agreed that the Committee would conduct a 