Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee 
 January 29-30, 2008 
 
 
 FOMC Minutes 
 Summary of Economic Projections 
 
 
 
 


A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 29, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, January 30, 2008 at 9:00 a.m.
 Present: Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman Mr. Fisher Mr. Kohn Mr. Kroszner Mr. Mishkin Ms. Pianalto Mr. Plosser Mr. Stern Mr. Warsh 
 Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
 Messrs. Hoenig, Poole, and Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston, respectively 
 Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Mr. Sheets, Economist Mr. Stockton, Economist 
 Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rosenblum, Slifman, Sniderman, Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists 
 Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account 
 Mr. Struckmeyer, 1  Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff Director for Management, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Parkinson, 2  Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Clouse, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Ms. Liang and Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 Ms. Barger 2  and Mr. Greenlee, 2  Associate Directors, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Gibson, 2  Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Dale, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 Messrs. Durham and Perli, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Bassett, 3  Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Doyle, 3  Senior Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors 
 Ms. Kusko,  3  Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Mr. Driscoll, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
 Ms. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
 Messrs. Fuhrer and Judd, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and San Francisco, respectively 
 Messrs. Altig and Angulo, 2  Mses. Hirtle 2  and Mosser, Messrs. Peters 2  and Rasche, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, New York, New York, New York, and St. Louis, respectively 
 Mr. Hakkio, Senior Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
 Mr. Krane, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
 Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
 
 1. Attended Wednesday's session.  Return to text 2. Attended portion of the meeting relating to the analysis of policy issues raised by financial market developments.  Return to text 3. Attended portion of the meeting relating to the economic outlook and monetary policy decision.  Return to text 
 
 In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate members of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 29, 2008 had been received and that these individuals had executed their oaths of office. 
 The elected members and alternate members were as follows: 
 Timothy F. Geithner, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with Christine M. Cumming, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate. 
 Charles I. Plosser, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, with Jeffrey M. Lacker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate. 
 Sandra Pianalto, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with Charles L. Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate.  
 Richard W. Fisher, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, with Dennis P. Lockhart, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate. 
 Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, with Janet L. Yellen, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate. 
 By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Federal Open Market Committee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2009:  
 
 
 
 Ben S. Bernanke 
 Chairman 
 
 Timothy F. Geithner 
 Vice Chairman 
 
 Brian F. Madigan 
 Secretary and Economist 
 
 Deborah J. Danker 
 Deputy Secretary 
 
 David W. Skidmore 
 Assistant Secretary 
 
 Michelle A. Smith 
 Assistant Secretary 
 
 Scott G. Alvarez 
 General Counsel 
 
 Thomas C. Baxter, Jr. 
 Deputy General Counsel 
 
 Richard M. Ashton 
 Assistant General Counsel 
 
 D. Nathan Sheets 
 Economist 
 
 David J. Stockton 
 Economist 
 
   
 
 Thomas A. Connors  
 
 William B. English 
 
 Steven B. Kamin  
 
 Loretta J. Mester 
 
 Arthur J. Rolnick  
 
 Harvey Rosenblum  
 
 Lawrence Slifman 
 
 Mark S. Sniderman 
 
 Joseph S. Tracy 
 
 David W. Wilcox 
 Associate Economists 
 By unanimous vote, the Committee made a few amendments to its rules and to the Program for Security of FOMC Information. The amendments primarily addressed the Committee's practice of approving the minutes via 